Computer security, cyber security, digital security or
information technology security (IT security) is the protection
of computer systems and networks from attack by malicious actors
that may result in unauthorized information disclosure, theft of, or
damage to hardware, software, or data, as well as from the disruption
or misdirection of the services they provide.[1][2]
The field is significant due to the expanded reliance on computer
systems, the Internet,
[3] and wireless network standards such as
Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. Also, due to the growth of smart devices,
including smartphones, televisions, and the various devices that
constitute the Internet of things (IoT). Cybersecurity is one of the
most significant challenges of the contemporary world, due to both
the complexity of information systems and the societies they support.
Security is of especially high importance for systems that govern
large-scale systems with far-reaching physical effects, such as power
distribution, elections, and finance.[4][5]
Since the Internet's arrival and with the digital transformation
initiated in recent years, the notion of cybersecurity has become a
familiar subject in both our professional and personal lives.
Cybersecurity and cyber threats have been consistently present for
the last 60 years of technological change. In the 1970s and 1980s, computer security was mainly
limited to academia until the conception of the Internet, where, with increased connectivity, computer
viruses and network intrusions began to take off. After the spread of viruses in the 1990s, the 2000s
marked the institutionalization of cyber threats and cybersecurity.
The April 1967 session organized by Willis Ware at the Spring Joint Computer Conference, and the
later publication of the Ware Report, were foundational moments in the history of the field of
computer security.
[6] Ware's work straddled the intersection of material, cultural, political, and social
concerns.[6]
A 1977 NIST publication[7]
introduced the CIA triad of confidentiality, integrity, and availability as a
clear and simple way to describe key security goals.[8] While still relevant, many more elaborate
frameworks have since been proposed.[9][10]
However, in the 1970s and 1980s, there were no grave computer threats because computers and the
later publication of the Ware Report, were foundational moments in the history of the field of
computer security.
[6] Ware's work straddled the intersection of material, cultural, political, and social
concerns.[6]
A 1977 NIST publication[7]
introduced the CIA triad of confidentiality, integrity, and availability as a
clear and simple way to describe key security goals.[8] While still relevant, many more elaborate
frameworks have since been proposed.[9][10]
However, in the 1970s and 1980s, there were no grave computer threats because computers and the
internet were still developing, and security threats were easily identifiable. More often, threats came
from malicious insiders who gained unauthorized access to sensitive documents and files. Although
malware and network breaches existed during the early years, they did not use them for financial gain.
By the second half of the 1970s, established computer firms like IBM started offering commercial
access control systems and computer security software products.[11]
History
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 2/54
One of the earliest examples of an attack on a computer network was the computer worm Creeper
written by Bob Thomas at BBN, which propagated through the ARPANET in 1971. The program was
purely experimental in nature and carried no malicious payload. A later program, Reaper, was created
by Ray Tomlinson in 1972 and used to destroy Creeper.
Between September 1986 and June 1987, a group of German hackers performed the first documented
case of cyber espionage. The group hacked into American defense contractors, universities, and
military base networks and sold gathered information to the Soviet KGB. The group was led by
Markus Hess, who was arrested on 29 June, 1987. He was convicted of espionage (along with two coconspirators) on 15 Feb 1990.
In 1988, one of the first computer worms, called the Morris worm, was distributed via the Internet. It
gained significant mainstream media attention.
In 1993, Netscape started developing the protocol SSL, shortly after the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) launched Mosaic 1.0, the first web browser, in 1993. Netscape
had SSL version 1.0 ready in 1994, but it was never released to the public due to many serious security
vulnerabilities. These weaknesses included replay attacks and a vulnerability that allowed hackers to
alter unencrypted communications sent by users. However, in February 1995, Netscape launched
Version 2.0.
The National Security Agency (NSA) is responsible for the protection of U.S. information systems and
also for collecting foreign intelligence.[12]
The agency analyzes commonly used software in order to find security flaws, which it reserves for
offensive purposes against competitors of the United States. The agency seldom takes defensive action
by reporting the flaws to software producers so that they can eliminate them.[13]
NSA contractors created and sold click-and-shoot attack tools to US agencies and close allies, but
eventually, the tools made their way to foreign adversaries. In 2016, NSAs own hacking tools were
hacked, and they have been used by Russia and North Korea. NSA's employees and contractors have
been recruited at high salaries by adversaries, anxious to compete in cyberwarfare. In 2007, the
United States and Israel began exploiting security flaws in the Microsoft Windows operating system to
attack and damage equipment used in Iran to refine nuclear materials. Iran responded by heavily
investing in their own cyberwarfare capability, which it began using against the United States.[13]
A vulnerability is a weakness in design, implementation, operation, or internal control. Most of the
vulnerabilities that have been discovered are documented in the Common Vulnerabilities and
Exposures (CVE) database.[14] An exploitable vulnerability is one for which at least one working attack
or exploit exists.[15] Vulnerabilities can be researched, reverse-engineered, hunted, or exploited using
automated tools or customized scripts.[16][17] To secure a computer system, it is important to
understand the attacks that can be made against it, and these threats can typically be classified into
one of these categories below:
Vulnerabilities and attacks
Backdoor
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 3/54
A backdoor in a computer system, a cryptosystem, or an algorithm, is any secret method of bypassing
normal authentication or security controls. They may exist for many reasons, including original design
or poor configuration. They may have been added by an authorized party to allow some legitimate
access, or by an attacker for malicious reasons; but regardless of the motives for their existence, they
create a vulnerability. Backdoors can be very hard to detect, and backdoors are usually discovered by
someone who has access to the application source code or intimate knowledge of the operating system
of the computer.
Denial of service attacks (DoS) are designed to make a machine or network resource unavailable to its
intended users.[18] Attackers can deny service to individual victims, such as by deliberately entering a
wrong password enough consecutive times to cause the victim's account to be locked, or they may
overload the capabilities of a machine or network and block all users at once. While a network attack
from a single IP address can be blocked by adding a new firewall rule, many forms of Distributed
denial of service (DDoS) attacks are possible, where the attack comes from a large number of points –
and defending is much more difficult. Such attacks can originate from the zombie computers of a
botnet or from a range of other possible techniques, including distributed reflective denial of service
(DRDoS), where innocent systems are fooled into sending traffic to the victim. With such attacks, the
amplification factor makes the attack easier for the attacker because they have to use little bandwidth
themselves.
An unauthorized user gaining physical access to a computer is most likely able to directly copy data
from it. They may also compromise security by making operating system modifications, installing
software worms, keyloggers, covert listening devices or using wireless microphones. Even when the
system is protected by standard security measures, these may be bypassed by booting another
operating system or tool from a CD-ROM or other bootable media. Disk encryption and Trusted
Platform Module are designed to prevent these attacks.
Eavesdropping is the act of surreptitiously listening to a private computer conversation
(communication), typically between hosts on a network. For instance, programs such as Carnivore
and NarusInSight have been used by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and NSA to eavesdrop
on the systems of internet service providers. Even machines that operate as a closed system (i.e., with
no contact with the outside world) can be eavesdropped upon by monitoring the faint electromagnetic
transmissions generated by the hardware. TEMPEST is a specification by the NSA referring to these
attacks.
Denial-of-service attack
Direct-access attacks
Eavesdropping
Multi-vector, polymorphic attacks
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 4/54
An example of a phishing email,
disguised as an official email from a
(fictional) bank. The sender is
attempting to trick the recipient into
revealing confidential information by
confirming it at the phisher's
website. Note the misspelling of the
words received and discrepancy as
recieved and discrepency,
respectively. Although the URL of
the bank's webpage appears to be
legitimate, the hyperlink points at
the phisher's webpage.
Surfacing in 2017, a new class of multi-vector,[19] polymorphic[20] cyber threats combined several
types of attacks and changed form to avoid cybersecurity controls as they spread.
Phishing is the attempt of acquiring sensitive information such as
usernames, passwords, and credit card details directly from users
by deceiving the users.[21] Phishing is typically carried out by email
spoofing or instant messaging, and it often directs users to enter
details at a fake website whose look and feel are almost identical to
the legitimate one. The fake website often asks for personal
information, such as login details and passwords. This information
can then be used to gain access to the individual's real account on
the real website. Preying on a victim's trust, phishing can be
classified as a form of social engineering. Attackers are using
creative ways to gain access to real accounts. A common scam is
for attackers to send fake electronic invoices[22]
to individuals
showing that they recently purchased music, apps, or others, and
instructing them to click on a link if the purchases were not
authorized. A more strategic type of phishing is spear-phishing
which leverages personal or organization-specific details to make
the attacker appear like a trusted source. Spear-phishing attacks
target specific individuals, rather than the broad net cast by
phishing attempts.[23]
Privilege escalation describes a situation where an attacker with some level of restricted access is able
to, without authorization, elevate their privileges or access level. For example, a standard computer
user may be able to exploit a vulnerability in the system to gain access to restricted data; or even
become root and have full unrestricted access to a system.
Reverse engineering is the process by which a man-made object is deconstructed to reveal its designs,
code, and architecture, or to extract knowledge from the object; similar to scientific research, the only
difference being that scientific research is about a natural phenomenon.[24]:3
Any computational system affects its environment in some form. This effect it has on its environment
includes a wide range of criteria, which can range from electromagnetic radiation to residual effect on
RAM cells which as a consequence make a Cold boot attack possible, to hardware implementation
faults that allow for access and or guessing of other values that normally should be inaccessible. In
Phishing
Privilege escalation
Reverse engineering
Side-channel attack
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 5/54
Side-channel attack scenarios, the attacker would gather such information about a system or network
to guess its internal state and as a result access the information which is assumed by the victim to be
secure.
Social engineering, in the context of computer security, aims to convince a user to disclose secrets
such as passwords, card numbers, etc. or grant physical access by, for example, impersonating a
senior executive, bank, a contractor, or a customer.[25] This generally involves exploiting people's
trust, and relying on their cognitive biases. A common scam involves emails sent to accounting and
finance department personnel, impersonating their CEO and urgently requesting some action. In early
2016, the FBI reported that such business email compromise (BEC) scams had cost US businesses
more than $2 billion in about two years.[26]
In May 2016, the Milwaukee Bucks NBA team was the victim of this type of cyber scam with a
perpetrator impersonating the team's president Peter Feigin, resulting in the handover of all the
team's employees' 2015 W-2 tax forms.[27]
Spoofing is an act of masquerading as a valid entity through the falsification of data (such as an IP
address or username), in order to gain access to information or resources that one is otherwise
unauthorized to obtain.[28][29]
 There are several types of spoofing, including:
Email spoofing, is where an attacker forges the sending (From, or source) address of an email.
IP address spoofing, where an attacker alters the source IP address in a network packet to hide
their identity or impersonate another computing system.
MAC spoofing, where an attacker modifies the Media Access Control (MAC) address of their
network interface controller to obscure their identity, or to pose as another.
Biometric spoofing, where an attacker produces a fake biometric sample to pose as another
user.
[30]
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) spoofing, where an attacker sends spoofed address resolution
protocol onto a local area network to associate their Media Access Control address with a different
host's IP address. This causes data to be sent to the attacker rather than the intended host.
In 2018, the cybersecurity firm Trellix published research on the life-threatening risk of spoofing in
the healthcare industry.[31]
Tampering describes a malicious modification or alteration of data. An intentional but unauthorized
act resulting in the modification of a system, components of systems, its intended behavior, or data.
So-called Evil Maid attacks and security services planting of surveillance capability into routers are
examples.[32]
Social engineering
Spoofing
Tampering
Malware
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 6/54
Malicious software (malware) installed on a computer can leak any information, such as personal
information, business information and passwords, can give control of the system to the attacker, and
can corrupt or delete data permanently.[33]
HTML files can carry payloads concealed as benign, inert data in order to defeat content filters. These
payloads can be reconstructed on the other side of the filter.[34]
Employee behavior can have a big impact on information security in organizations. Cultural concepts
can help different segments of the organization work effectively or work against effectiveness toward
information security within an organization. Information security culture is the "...totality of patterns
of behavior in an organization that contributes to the protection of information of all kinds."[35]
Andersson and Reimers (2014) found that employees often do not see themselves as part of their
organization's information security effort and often take actions that impede organizational
changes.[36]
Indeed, the Verizon Data Breach Investigations Report 2020, which examined 3,950
security breaches, discovered 30% of cybersecurity incidents involved internal actors within a
company.[37] Research shows information security culture needs to be improved continuously. In
"Information Security Culture from Analysis to Change", authors commented, "It's a never-ending
process, a cycle of evaluation and change or maintenance." To manage the information security
culture, five steps should be taken: pre-evaluation, strategic planning, operative planning,
implementation, and post-evaluation.[38]
Pre-evaluation: To identify the awareness of information security within employees and to analyze
the current security policies.
Strategic planning: To come up with a better awareness program, clear targets need to be set.
Assembling a team of skilled professionals is helpful to achieve it.
Operative planning: A good security culture can be established based on internal communication,
management buy-in, security awareness and a training program.[38]
Implementation: Four stages should be used to implement the information security culture. They
are:
1. Commitment of the management
2. Communication with organizational members
3. Courses for all organizational members
4. Commitment of the employees[38]
Post-evaluation: To assess the success of the planning and implementation, and to identify
unresolved areas of concern.
HTML smuggling
Information security culture
Systems at risk
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 7/54
The growth in the number of computer systems and the increasing reliance upon them by individuals,
businesses, industries, and governments means that there are an increasing number of systems at
risk.
The computer systems of financial regulators and financial institutions like the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission, SWIFT, investment banks, and commercial banks are prominent hacking
targets for cybercriminals interested in manipulating markets and making illicit gains.[39] Websites
and apps that accept or store credit card numbers, brokerage accounts, and bank account information
are also prominent hacking targets, because of the potential for immediate financial gain from
transferring money, making purchases, or selling the information on the black market.
[40]
In-store
payment systems and ATMs have also been tampered with in order to gather customer account data
and PINs.
The UCLA Internet Report: Surveying the Digital Future (2000) found that the privacy of personal
data created barriers to online sales and that more than nine out of 10 internet users were somewhat
or very concerned about credit card security.[41]
The most common web technologies for improving security between browsers and websites are named
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer), and its successor TLS (Transport Layer Security), identity management
and authentication services, and domain name services allow companies and consumers to engage in
secure communications and commerce. Several versions of SSL and TLS are commonly used today in
applications such as web browsing, e-mail, internet faxing, instant messaging, and VoIP (voice-overIP). There are various interoperable implementations of these technologies, including at least one
implementation that is open source. Open source allows anyone to view the application's source code,
and look for and report vulnerabilities.
The credit card companies Visa and MasterCard cooperated to develop the secure EMV chip which is
embedded in credit cards. Further developments include the Chip Authentication Program where
banks give customers hand-held card readers to perform online secure transactions. Other
developments in this arena include the development of technology such as Instant Issuance which has
enabled shopping mall kiosks acting on behalf of banks to issue on-the-spot credit cards to interested
customers.
Computers control functions at many utilities, including coordination of telecommunications, the
power grid, nuclear power plants, and valve opening and closing in water and gas networks. The
Internet is a potential attack vector for such machines if connected, but the Stuxnet worm
demonstrated that even equipment controlled by computers not connected to the Internet can be
vulnerable. In 2014, the Computer Emergency Readiness Team, a division of the Department of
Homeland Security, investigated 79 hacking incidents at energy companies.[42]
Financial systems
Utilities and industrial equipment
Aviation
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 8/54
The aviation industry is very reliant on a series of complex systems which could be attacked.[43] A
simple power outage at one airport can cause repercussions worldwide,[44] much of the system relies
on radio transmissions which could be disrupted,[45] and controlling aircraft over oceans is especially
dangerous because radar surveillance only extends 175 to 225 miles offshore.[46] There is also
potential for attack from within an aircraft.[47]
In Europe, with the (Pan-European Network Service)
[48] and NewPENS,[49] and in the US with the
NextGen program,[50] air navigation service providers are moving to create their own dedicated
networks.
Many modern passports are now biometric passports, containing an embedded microchip that stores
a digitized photograph and personal information such as name, gender, and date of birth. In addition,
more countries are introducing facial recognition technology to reduce identity-related fraud. The
introduction of the ePassport has assisted border officials in verifying the identity of the passport
holder, thus allowing for quick passenger processing.[51] Plans are under way in the US, the UK, and
Australia to introduce SmartGate kiosks with both retina and fingerprint recognition technology.[52]
The airline industry is moving from the use of traditional paper tickets towards the use of electronic
tickets (e-tickets). These have been made possible by advances in online credit card transactions in
partnership with the airlines. Long-distance bus companies are also switching over to e-ticketing
transactions today.
The consequences of a successful attack range from loss of confidentiality to loss of system integrity,
air traffic control outages, loss of aircraft, and even loss of life.
Desktop computers and laptops are commonly targeted to gather passwords or financial account
information or to construct a botnet to attack another target. Smartphones, tablet computers, smart
watches, and other mobile devices such as quantified self devices like activity trackers have sensors
such as cameras, microphones, GPS receivers, compasses, and accelerometers which could be
exploited, and may collect personal information, including sensitive health information. WiFi,
Bluetooth, and cell phone networks on any of these devices could be used as attack vectors, and
sensors might be remotely activated after a successful breach.[53]
The increasing number of home automation devices such as the Nest thermostat are also potential
targets.[53]
Today many health-care providers and health insurance companies use the internet to provide
enhanced products and services, for example through use of tele-health to potentially offer better
quality and access to healthcare, or fitness trackers to lower insurance premiums.
Consumer devices
Healthcare
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 9/54
The health care company Humana partners with WebMD, Oracle Corporation, EDS and Microsoft to
enable its members to access their health care records, as well as to provide an overview of health care
plans.[54] Patient records are increasingly being placed on secure in-house networks, alleviating the
need for extra storage space.[55]
Large corporations are common targets. In many cases attacks are aimed at financial gain through
identity theft and involve data breaches. Examples include the loss of millions of clients' credit card
and financial details by Home Depot,
[56] Staples,
[57] Target Corporation,
[58]
 and Equifax.
[59]
Medical records have been targeted in general identify theft, health insurance fraud, and
impersonating patients to obtain prescription drugs for recreational purposes or resale.[60] Although
cyber threats continue to increase, 62% of all organizations did not increase security training for their
business in 2015.[61]
Not all attacks are financially motivated, however: security firm HBGary Federal had a serious series
of attacks in 2011 from hacktivist group Anonymous in retaliation for the firm's CEO claiming to have
infiltrated their group,[62][63] and Sony Pictures was hacked in 2014 with the apparent dual motive of
embarrassing the company through data leaks and crippling the company by wiping workstations and
servers.[64][65]
Vehicles are increasingly computerized, with engine timing, cruise control, anti-lock brakes, seat belt
tensioners, door locks, airbags and advanced driver-assistance systems on many models. Additionally,
connected cars may use WiFi and Bluetooth to communicate with onboard consumer devices and the
cell phone network.[66] Self-driving cars are expected to be even more complex. All of these systems
carry some security risks, and such issues have gained wide attention.[67][68][69]
Simple examples of risk include a malicious compact disc being used as an attack vector,[70] and the
car's onboard microphones being used for eavesdropping. However, if access is gained to a car's
internal controller area network, the danger is much greater[66] – and in a widely publicized 2015 test,
hackers remotely carjacked a vehicle from 10 miles away and drove it into a ditch.[71][72]
Manufacturers are reacting in numerous ways, with Tesla in 2016 pushing out some security fixes
over the air into its cars' computer systems.[73] In the area of autonomous vehicles, in September
2016 the United States Department of Transportation announced some initial safety standards, and
called for states to come up with uniform policies.[74][75][76]
Additionally, e-Drivers’ licenses are being developed using the same technology. For example,
Mexico’s licensing authority (ICV) has used a smart card platform to issue the first e-Drivers’ licenses
to the city of Monterrey, in the state of Nuevo León.
[77]
Large corporations
Automobiles
Shipping
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 10/54
Shipping companies[78] have adopted RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) technology as an
efficient, digitally secure, tracking device. Unlike a barcode, RFID can be read up to 20 feet away.
RFID is used by FedEx[79]
 and UPS.
[80]
Government and military computer systems are commonly attacked by activists[81][82][83] and foreign
powers.[84][85][86][87] Local and regional government infrastructure such as traffic light controls,
police and intelligence agency communications, personnel records, as well as student records.[88]
The FBI, CIA, and Pentagon, all utilize secure controlled access technology for any of their buildings.
However, the use of this form of technology is spreading into the entrepreneurial world. More and
more companies are taking advantage of the development of digitally secure controlled access
technology. GE's ACUVision, for example, offers a single panel platform for access control, alarm
monitoring and digital recording.[89]
The Internet of things (IoT) is the network of physical objects such as devices, vehicles, and buildings
that are embedded with electronics, software, sensors, and network connectivity that enables them to
collect and exchange data.[90] Concerns have been raised that this is being developed without
appropriate consideration of the security challenges involved.[91][92]
While the IoT creates opportunities for more direct integration of the physical world into computerbased systems,[93][94]
it also provides opportunities for misuse. In particular, as the Internet of Things
spreads widely, cyberattacks are likely to become an increasingly physical (rather than simply virtual)
threat.[95]
If a front door's lock is connected to the Internet, and can be locked/unlocked from a
phone, then a criminal could enter the home at the press of a button from a stolen or hacked phone.
People could stand to lose much more than their credit card numbers in a world controlled by IoTenabled devices. Thieves have also used electronic means to circumvent non-Internet-connected hotel
door locks.[96]
An attack that targets physical infrastructure and/or human lives is sometimes referred to as a cyberkinetic attack. As IoT devices and appliances gain currency, cyber-kinetic attacks can become
pervasive and significantly damaging.
Medical devices have either been successfully attacked or had potentially deadly vulnerabilities
demonstrated, including both in-hospital diagnostic equipment[97] and implanted devices including
pacemakers[98] and insulin pumps.
[99] There are many reports of hospitals and hospital organizations
getting hacked, including ransomware attacks,[100][101][102][103] Windows XP exploits,[104][105]
viruses,[106][107] and data breaches of sensitive data stored on hospital servers.[108][101][109][110] On 28
Government
Internet of things and physical vulnerabilities
Medical systems
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 11/54
December 2016 the US Food and Drug Administration released its recommendations for how medical
device manufacturers should maintain the security of Internet-connected devices – but no structure
for enforcement.[111][112]
In distributed generation systems, the risk of a cyber attack is real, according to Daily Energy Insider.
An attack could cause a loss of power in a large area for a long period of time, and such an attack could
have just as severe consequences as a natural disaster. The District of Columbia is considering
creating a Distributed Energy Resources (DER) Authority within the city, with the goal being for
customers to have more insight into their own energy use and giving the local electric utility, Pepco,
the chance to better estimate energy demand. The D.C. proposal, however, would "allow third-party
vendors to create numerous points of energy distribution, which could potentially create more
opportunities for cyber attackers to threaten the electric grid."[113]
Perhaps the most widely known digitally secure telecommunication device is the SIM (Subscriber
Identity Module) card, a device that is embedded in most of the world’s cellular devices before any
service can be obtained. The SIM card is just the beginning of this digitally secure environment.
The Smart Card Web Servers draft standard (SCWS) defines the interfaces to an HTTP server in a
smart card.
[114] Tests are being conducted to secure OTA ("over-the-air") payment and credit card
information from and to a mobile phone. Combination SIM/DVD devices are being developed through
Smart Video Card technology which embeds a DVD-compliant optical disc into the card body of a
regular SIM card.
Other telecommunication developments involving digital security include mobile signatures, which
use the embedded SIM card to generate a legally binding electronic signature.
Serious financial damage has been caused by security breaches, but because there is no standard
model for estimating the cost of an incident, the only data available is that which is made public by the
organizations involved. "Several computer security consulting firms produce estimates of total
worldwide losses attributable to virus and worm attacks and to hostile digital acts in general. The
2003 loss estimates by these firms range from $13 billion (worms and viruses only) to $226 billion
(for all forms of covert attacks). The reliability of these estimates is often challenged; the underlying
methodology is basically anecdotal."[115]
However, reasonable estimates of the financial cost of security breaches can actually help
organizations make rational investment decisions. According to the classic Gordon-Loeb Model
analyzing the optimal investment level in information security, one can conclude that the amount a
firm spends to protect information should generally be only a small fraction of the expected loss (i.e.,
the expected value of the loss resulting from a cyber/information security breach).[116]
Energy sector
Telecommunications
Impact of security breaches
Attacker motivation
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 12/54
As with physical security, the motivations for breaches of computer security vary between attackers.
Some are thrill-seekers or vandals, some are activists, others are criminals looking for financial gain.
State-sponsored attackers are now common and well resourced but started with amateurs such as
Markus Hess who hacked for the KGB, as recounted by Clifford Stoll in The Cuckoo's Egg.
Additionally, recent attacker motivations can be traced back to extremist organizations seeking to gain
political advantage or disrupt social agendas.[117] The growth of the internet, mobile technologies, and
inexpensive computing devices have led to a rise in capabilities but also to the risk to environments
that are deemed as vital to operations. All critical targeted environments are susceptible to
compromise and this has led to a series of proactive studies on how to migrate the risk by taking into
consideration motivations by these types of actors. Several stark differences exist between the hacker
motivation and that of nation state actors seeking to attack based on an ideological preference.[118]
A standard part of threat modeling for any particular system is to identify what might motivate an
attack on that system, and who might be motivated to breach it. The level and detail of precautions
will vary depending on the system to be secured. A home personal computer, bank, and classified
military network face very different threats, even when the underlying technologies in use are
similar.[119]
In computer security, a countermeasure is an action, device, procedure or technique that reduces a
threat, a vulnerability, or an attack by eliminating or preventing it, by minimizing the harm it can
cause, or by discovering and reporting it so that corrective action can be taken.[120][121][122]
Some common countermeasures are listed in the following sections:
Security by design, or alternately secure by design, means that the software has been designed from
the ground up to be secure. In this case, security is considered a main feature.
Some of the techniques in this approach include:
The principle of least privilege, where each part of the system has only the privileges that are
needed for its function. That way, even if an attacker gains access to that part, they only have
limited access to the whole system.
Automated theorem proving to prove the correctness of crucial software subsystems.
Code reviews and unit testing, approaches to make modules more secure where formal
correctness proofs are not possible.
Defense in depth, where the design is such that more than one subsystem needs to be violated to
compromise the integrity of the system and the information it holds.
Default secure settings, and design to fail secure rather than fail insecure (see fail-safe for the
equivalent in safety engineering). Ideally, a secure system should require a deliberate, conscious,
knowledgeable and free decision on the part of legitimate authorities in order to make it insecure.
Audit trails track system activity so that when a security breach occurs, the mechanism and extent
of the breach can be determined. Storing audit trails remotely, where they can only be appended
to, can keep intruders from covering their tracks.
Computer protection (countermeasures)
Security by design
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 13/54
Full disclosure of all vulnerabilities, to ensure that the window of vulnerability is kept as short as
possible when bugs are discovered.
The Open Security Architecture organization defines IT security architecture as "the design artifacts
that describe how the security controls (security countermeasures) are positioned, and how they relate
to the overall information technology architecture. These controls serve the purpose to maintain the
system's quality attributes: confidentiality, integrity, availability, accountability and assurance
services".[123]
Techopedia defines security architecture as "a unified security design that addresses the necessities
and potential risks involved in a certain scenario or environment. It also specifies when and where to
apply security controls. The design process is generally reproducible." The key attributes of security
architecture are:[124]
the relationship of different components and how they depend on each other.
determination of controls based on risk assessment, good practices, finances, and legal matters.
the standardization of controls.
Practicing security architecture provides the right foundation to systematically address business, IT
and security concerns in an organization.
A state of computer security is the conceptual ideal, attained by the use of the three processes: threat
prevention, detection, and response. These processes are based on various policies and system
components, which include the following:
User account access controls and cryptography can protect systems files and data, respectively.
Firewalls are by far the most common prevention systems from a network security perspective as
they can (if properly configured) shield access to internal network services, and block certain kinds
of attacks through packet filtering. Firewalls can be both hardware and software-based.
Intrusion Detection System (IDS) products are designed to detect network attacks in-progress and
assist in post-attack forensics, while audit trails and logs serve a similar function for individual
systems.
Response is necessarily defined by the assessed security requirements of an individual system
and may cover the range from simple upgrade of protections to notification of legal authorities,
counter-attacks, and the like. In some special cases, the complete destruction of the compromised
system is favored, as it may happen that not all the compromised resources are detected.
Cyber security awareness training to cope with cyber threats and attacks. [125]
Forward web proxy solutions can prevent the client to visit malicious web pages and inspect the
content before downloading to the client machines.
Today, computer security consists mainly of preventive measures, like firewalls or an exit procedure.
A firewall can be defined as a way of filtering network data between a host or a network and another
network, such as the Internet, and can be implemented as software running on the machine, hooking
into the network stack (or, in the case of most UNIX-based operating systems such as Linux, built into
Security architecture
Security measures
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 14/54
the operating system kernel) to provide real-time filtering and blocking. Another implementation is a
so-called physical firewall, which consists of a separate machine filtering network traffic. Firewalls
are common amongst machines that are permanently connected to the Internet.
Some organizations are turning to big data platforms, such as Apache Hadoop, to extend data
accessibility and machine learning to detect advanced persistent threats.
[126]
However, relatively few organizations maintain computer systems with effective detection systems,
and fewer still have organized response mechanisms in place. As a result, as Reuters pointed out in
2010: "Companies for the first time report they are losing more through electronic theft of data than
physical stealing of assets".[127] The primary obstacle to effective eradication of cybercrime could be
traced to excessive reliance on firewalls and other automated detection systems. Yet it is basic
evidence gathering by using packet capture appliances that puts criminals behind bars.
In order to ensure adequate security, the confidentiality, integrity and availability of a network, better
known as the CIA triad, must be protected and is considered the foundation to information
security.[128] To achieve those objectives, administrative, physical and technical security measures
should be employed. The amount of security afforded to an asset can only be determined when its
value is known.[129]
Vulnerability management is the cycle of identifying, remediating or mitigating vulnerabilities,
[130]
especially in software and firmware. Vulnerability management is integral to computer security and
network security.
Vulnerabilities can be discovered with a vulnerability scanner, which analyzes a computer system in
search of known vulnerabilities,[131] such as open ports, insecure software configuration, and
susceptibility to malware. In order for these tools to be effective, they must be kept up to date with
every new update the vendor release. Typically, these updates will scan for the new vulnerabilities that
were introduced recently.
Beyond vulnerability scanning, many organizations contract outside security auditors to run regular
penetration tests against their systems to identify vulnerabilities. In some sectors, this is a contractual
requirement.[132]
While formal verification of the correctness of computer systems is possible,[133][134]
it is not yet
common. Operating systems formally verified include seL4,
[135] and SYSGO's PikeOS[136][137] – but
these make up a very small percentage of the market.
Two factor authentication is a method for mitigating unauthorized access to a system or sensitive
information. It requires something you know; a password or PIN, and something you have; a card,
dongle, cellphone, or another piece of hardware. This increases security as an unauthorized person
needs both of these to gain access.
Social engineering and direct computer access (physical) attacks can only be prevented by noncomputer means, which can be difficult to enforce, relative to the sensitivity of the information.
Training is often involved to help mitigate this risk, but even in highly disciplined environments (e.g.
Vulnerability management
Reducing vulnerabilities
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 15/54
military organizations), social engineering attacks can still be difficult to foresee and prevent.
Inoculation, derived from inoculation theory, seeks to prevent social engineering and other fraudulent
tricks or traps by instilling a resistance to persuasion attempts through exposure to similar or related
attempts.[138]
It is possible to reduce an attacker's chances by keeping systems up to date with security patches and
updates, using a security scanner and/or hiring people with expertise in security, though none of these
guarantee the prevention of an attack. The effects of data loss/damage can be reduced by careful
backing up and insurance.
While hardware may be a source of insecurity, such as with microchip vulnerabilities maliciously
introduced during the manufacturing process,[139][140] hardware-based or assisted computer security
also offers an alternative to software-only computer security. Using devices and methods such as
dongles, trusted platform modules, intrusion-aware cases, drive locks, disabling USB ports, and
mobile-enabled access may be considered more secure due to the physical access (or sophisticated
backdoor access) required in order to be compromised. Each of these is covered in more detail below.
USB dongles are typically used in software licensing schemes to unlock software capabilities, but
they can also be seen as a way to prevent unauthorized access to a computer or other device's
software. The dongle, or key, essentially creates a secure encrypted tunnel between the software
application and the key. The principle is that an encryption scheme on the dongle, such as
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) provides a stronger measure of security since it is harder to
hack and replicate the dongle than to simply copy the native software to another machine and use
it. Another security application for dongles is to use them for accessing web-based content such
as cloud software or Virtual Private Networks (VPNs).[141]
 In addition, a USB dongle can be
configured to lock or unlock a computer.
[142]
Trusted platform modules (TPMs) secure devices by integrating cryptographic capabilities onto
access devices, through the use of microprocessors, or so-called computers-on-a-chip. TPMs
used in conjunction with server-side software offer a way to detect and authenticate hardware
devices, preventing unauthorized network and data access.[143]
Computer case intrusion detection refers to a device, typically a push-button switch, which detects
when a computer case is opened. The firmware or BIOS is programmed to show an alert to the
operator when the computer is booted up the next time.
Drive locks are essentially software tools to encrypt hard drives, making them inaccessible to
thieves.[144] Tools exist specifically for encrypting external drives as well.[145]
Disabling USB ports is a security option for preventing unauthorized and malicious access to an
otherwise secure computer. Infected USB dongles connected to a network from a computer inside
the firewall are considered by the magazine Network World as the most common hardware threat
facing computer networks.
Disconnecting or disabling peripheral devices ( like camera, GPS, removable storage etc.), that
are not in use.[146]
Mobile-enabled access devices are growing in popularity due to the ubiquitous nature of cell
phones. Built-in capabilities such as Bluetooth, the newer Bluetooth low energy (LE), near-field
communication (NFC) on non-iOS devices and biometric validation such as thumbprint readers, as
well as QR code reader software designed for mobile devices, offer new, secure ways for mobile
phones to connect to access control systems. These control systems provide computer security
and can also be used for controlling access to secure buildings.[147]
Hardware protection mechanisms
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 16/54
IOMMUs allow for hardware-based sandboxing of components in mobile and desktop computers
by utilizing direct memory access protections.[148][149]
Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs) can be used as a digital fingerprint or a unique identifier to
integrated circuits and hardware, providing users the ability to secure the hardware supply chains
going into their systems.[150][151]
One use of the term computer security refers to technology that is used to implement secure operating
systems. In the 1980s, the United States Department of Defense (DoD) used the "Orange Book"[152]
standards, but the current international standard ISO/IEC 15408, Common Criteria defines a number
of progressively more stringent Evaluation Assurance Levels. Many common operating systems meet
the EAL4 standard of being "Methodically Designed, Tested and Reviewed", but the formal
verification required for the highest levels means that they are uncommon. An example of an EAL6
("Semiformally Verified Design and Tested") system is INTEGRITY-178B, which is used in the Airbus
A380[153] and several military jets.[154]
In software engineering, secure coding aims to guard against the accidental introduction of security
vulnerabilities. It is also possible to create software designed from the ground up to be secure. Such
systems are secure by design. Beyond this, formal verification aims to prove the correctness of the
algorithms underlying a system;[155]
 important for cryptographic protocols for example.
Within computer systems, two of the main security models capable of enforcing privilege separation
are access control lists (ACLs) and role-based access control (RBAC).
An access-control list (ACL), with respect to a computer file system, is a list of permissions associated
with an object. An ACL specifies which users or system processes are granted access to objects, as well
as what operations are allowed on given objects.
Role-based access control is an approach to restricting system access to authorized users,[156][157][158]
used by the majority of enterprises with more than 500 employees,[159] and can implement mandatory
access control (MAC) or discretionary access control (DAC).
A further approach, capability-based security has been mostly restricted to research operating
systems. Capabilities can, however, also be implemented at the language level, leading to a style of
programming that is essentially a refinement of standard object-oriented design. An open-source
project in the area is the E language.
The end-user is widely recognized as the weakest link in the security chain
[160] and it is estimated that
more than 90% of security incidents and breaches involve some kind of human error.[161][162] Among
the most commonly recorded forms of errors and misjudgment are poor password management,
Secure operating systems
Secure coding
Capabilities and access control lists
End user security training
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 17/54
sending emails containing sensitive data and attachments to the wrong recipient, the inability to
recognize misleading URLs and to identify fake websites and dangerous email attachments. A
common mistake that users make is saving their user id/password in their browsers to make it easier
to log in to banking sites. This is a gift to attackers who have obtained access to a machine by some
means. The risk may be mitigated by the use of two-factor authentication.[163]
As the human component of cyber risk is particularly relevant in determining the global cyber risk[164]
an organization is facing, security awareness training, at all levels, not only provides formal
compliance with regulatory and industry mandates but is considered essential[165]
in reducing cyber
risk and protecting individuals and companies from the great majority of cyber threats.
The focus on the end-user represents a profound cultural change for many security practitioners, who
have traditionally approached cybersecurity exclusively from a technical perspective, and moves along
the lines suggested by major security centers[166]
to develop a culture of cyber awareness within the
organization, recognizing that a security-aware user provides an important line of defense against
cyber attacks.
Related to end-user training, digital hygiene or cyber hygiene is a fundamental principle relating
to information security and, as the analogy with personal hygiene shows, is the equivalent of
establishing simple routine measures to minimize the risks from cyber threats. The assumption is that
good cyber hygiene practices can give networked users another layer of protection, reducing the risk
that one vulnerable node will be used to either mount attacks or compromise another node or
network, especially from common cyberattacks.[167] Cyber hygiene should also not be mistaken for
proactive cyber defence, a military term.[168]
As opposed to a purely technology-based defense against threats, cyber hygiene mostly regards
routine measures that are technically simple to implement and mostly dependent on discipline[169] or
education.[170]
It can be thought of as an abstract list of tips or measures that have been demonstrated
as having a positive effect on personal and/or collective digital security. As such, these measures can
be performed by laypeople, not just security experts.
Cyber hygiene relates to personal hygiene as computer viruses relate to biological viruses (or
pathogens). However, while the term computer virus was coined almost simultaneously with the
creation of the first working computer viruses,[171] the term cyber hygiene is a much later invention,
perhaps as late as 2000[172] by Internet pioneer Vint Cerf. It has since been adopted by the
Congress[173] and Senate of the United States,[174]
the FBI,[175] EU institutions[167] and heads of
state.[168]
Responding to attempted security breaches is often very difficult for a variety of reasons, including:
Identifying attackers is difficult, as they may operate through proxies, temporary anonymous dialup accounts, wireless connections, and other anonymizing procedures which make back-tracing
difficult - and are often located in another jurisdiction. If they successfully breach security, they
have also often gained enough administrative access to enable them to delete logs to cover their
tracks.
Digital hygiene
Response to breaches
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 18/54
The sheer number of attempted attacks, often by automated vulnerability scanners and computer
worms, is so large that organizations cannot spend time pursuing each.
Law enforcement officers often lack the skills, interest or budget to pursue attackers. In addition,
the identification of attackers across a network may require logs from various points in the network
and in many countries, which may be difficult or time-consuming to obtain.
Where an attack succeeds and a breach occurs, many jurisdictions now have in place mandatory
security breach notification laws.
Access control
Anti-keyloggers
Anti-malware
Anti-spyware
Anti-subversion software
Anti-tamper software
Anti-theft
Antivirus software
Cryptographic software
Computer-aided dispatch (CAD)
Firewall
Intrusion detection system (IDS)
Intrusion prevention system (IPS)
Log management software
Parental control
Records management
Sandbox
Security information management
Security information and event management (SIEM)
Software and operating system updating
Vulnerability Management
Computer security incident management is an organized approach to addressing and managing the
aftermath of a computer security incident or compromise with the goal of preventing a breach or
thwarting a cyberattack. An incident that is not identified and managed at the time of intrusion
typically escalates to a more damaging event such as a data breach or system failure. The intended
outcome of a computer security incident response plan is to contain the incident, limit damage and
assist recovery to business as usual. Responding to compromises quickly can mitigate exploited
vulnerabilities, restore services and processes and minimize losses.[176]
Incident response planning
allows an organization to establish a series of best practices to stop an intrusion before it causes
damage. Typical incident response plans contain a set of written instructions that outline the
organization's response to a cyberattack. Without a documented plan in place, an organization may
not successfully detect an intrusion or compromise and stakeholders may not understand their roles,
processes and procedures during an escalation, slowing the organization's response and resolution.
Types of security and privacy
Computer security incident management
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 19/54
There are four key components of a computer security incident response plan:
1. Preparation: Preparing stakeholders on the procedures for handling computer security incidents or
compromises
2. Detection and analysis: Identifying and investigating suspicious activity to confirm a security
incident, prioritizing the response based on impact and coordinating notification of the incident
3. Containment, eradication and recovery: Isolating affected systems to prevent escalation and limit
impact, pinpointing the genesis of the incident, removing malware, affected systems and bad
actors from the environment and restoring systems and data when a threat no longer remains
4. Post incident activity: Post mortem analysis of the incident, its root cause and the organization's
response with the intent of improving the incident response plan and future response efforts.[177]
Some illustrative examples of different types of computer security breaches are given below.
In 1988, 60,000 computers were connected to the Internet, and most were mainframes,
minicomputers and professional workstations. On 2 November 1988, many started to slow down,
because they were running a malicious code that demanded processor time and that spread itself to
other computers – the first internet computer worm.
[178] The software was traced back to 23-year-old
Cornell University graduate student Robert Tappan Morris who said "he wanted to count how many
machines were connected to the Internet".[178]
In 1994, over a hundred intrusions were made by unidentified crackers into the Rome Laboratory, the
US Air Force's main command and research facility. Using trojan horses, hackers were able to obtain
unrestricted access to Rome's networking systems and remove traces of their activities. The intruders
were able to obtain classified files, such as air tasking order systems data and furthermore able to
penetrate connected networks of National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Goddard Space
Flight Center, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, some Defense contractors, and other private sector
organizations, by posing as a trusted Rome center user.[179]
In early 2007, American apparel and home goods company TJX announced that it was the victim of
an unauthorized computer systems intrusion[180] and that the hackers had accessed a system that
stored data on credit card, debit card, check, and merchandise return transactions.[181]
In 2010, the computer worm known as Stuxnet reportedly ruined almost one-fifth of Iran's nuclear
centrifuges.
[182]
It did so by disrupting industrial programmable logic controllers (PLCs) in a targeted
attack. This is generally believed to have been launched by Israel and the United States to disrupt
Notable attacks and breaches
Robert Morris and the first computer worm
Rome Laboratory
TJX customer credit card details
Stuxnet attack
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 20/54
Iran's nuclear program[183][184][185][186]
 – although neither has publicly admitted this.
In early 2013, documents provided by Edward Snowden were published by The Washington Post and
The Guardian[187][188] exposing the massive scale of NSA global surveillance. There were also
indications that the NSA may have inserted a backdoor in a NIST standard for encryption.[189] This
standard was later withdrawn due to widespread criticism.[190] The NSA additionally were revealed to
have tapped the links between Google's data centers.[191]
A Ukrainian hacker known as Rescator broke into Target Corporation computers in 2013, stealing
roughly 40 million credit cards,[192] and then Home Depot computers in 2014, stealing between 53
and 56 million credit card numbers.[193] Warnings were delivered at both corporations, but ignored;
physical security breaches using self checkout machines are believed to have played a large role. "The
malware utilized is absolutely unsophisticated and uninteresting," says Jim Walter, director of threat
intelligence operations at security technology company McAfee – meaning that the heists could have
easily been stopped by existing antivirus software had administrators responded to the warnings. The
size of the thefts has resulted in major attention from state and Federal United States authorities and
the investigation is ongoing.
In April 2015, the Office of Personnel Management discovered it had been hacked more than a year
earlier in a data breach, resulting in the theft of approximately 21.5 million personnel records handled
by the office.[194] The Office of Personnel Management hack has been described by federal officials as
among the largest breaches of government data in the history of the United States.[195] Data targeted
in the breach included personally identifiable information such as Social Security numbers, names,
dates and places of birth, addresses, and fingerprints of current and former government employees as
well as anyone who had undergone a government background check.[196][197]
It is believed the hack
was perpetrated by Chinese hackers.[198]
In July 2015, a hacker group is known as The Impact Team successfully breached the extramarital
relationship website Ashley Madison, created by Avid Life Media. The group claimed that they had
taken not only company data but user data as well. After the breach, The Impact Team dumped emails
from the company's CEO, to prove their point, and threatened to dump customer data unless the
website was taken down permanently.[199] When Avid Life Media did not take the site offline the
group released two more compressed files, one 9.7GB and the second 20GB. After the second data
dump, Avid Life Media CEO Noel Biderman resigned; but the website remained to function.
Global surveillance disclosures
Target and Home Depot breaches
Office of Personnel Management data breach
Ashley Madison breach
Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_security 21/54
In June 2021, the cyber attack took down the largest fuel pipeline in the U.S. and led to shortages
across the East Coast.[200]
International legal issues of cyber attacks are complicated in nature. There is no global base of
common rules to judge, and eventually punish, cybercrimes and cybercriminals - and where security
firms or agencies do locate the cybercriminal behind the creation of a particular piece of malware or
form of cyber attack, often the local authorities cannot take action due to lack of laws under which to
prosecute.[201][202] Proving attribution for cybercrimes and cyberattacks is also a major problem for
all law enforcement agencies. "Computer viruses switch from one country to another, from one
jurisdiction to another – moving around the world, using the fact that we don't have the capability to
globally police operations like this. So the Internet is as if someone [had] given free plane tickets to all
the online criminals of the world."[201] The use of techniques such as dynamic DNS, fast flux and
bullet proof servers add to the difficulty of investigation and enforcement.
The role of the government is to make regulations to force companies and organizations to protect
their systems, infrastructure and information from any cyberattacks, but also to protect its own
national infrastructure such as the national power-grid.
[203]
The government's regulatory role in cyberspace is complicated. For some, cyberspace was seen as a
virtual space that was to remain free of government intervention, as can be seen in many of today's
libertarian blockchain and bitcoin discussions.[204]
Many government officials and experts think that the government should do more and that there is a
crucial need for improved regulation, mainly due to the failure of the private sector to solve efficiently
the cybersecurity problem. R. Clarke said during a panel discussion at the RSA Security Conference in
San Francisco, he believes that the "industry only responds when you threaten regulation. If the
industry doesn't respond (to the threat), you have to follow through."[205] On the other hand,
executives from the private sector agree that improvements are necessary, but think that government
intervention would affect their ability to innovate efficiently. Daniel R. McCarthy analyzed this publicprivate partnership in cybersecurity and reflected on the role of cybersecurity in the broader
constitution of political order.[206]
On 22 May 2020, the UN Security Council held its second ever informal meeting on cybersecurity to
focus on cyber challenges to international peace. According to UN Secretary-General António
Guterres, new technologies are too often used to violate rights.[207]
Many different teams and organizations exist, including:
The Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST) is the global association of
CSIRTs.[208] The US-CERT, AT&T, Apple, Cisco, McAfee, Microsoft are all members of this
international team.[209]
Legal issues and global regulation
Role of government
International actions
8/4/23, 6:39 PM Computer security - Wi